---
title: "Adaptive Parameterization for Neural Dialogue Generation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2019-11-03-AdaND
# excerpt: 'This paper is about the number 1. The number 2 is left for future work.'
date: 2019-11-03
venue: 'EMNLP 2019'
paperurl: 'https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D19-1188/'
citation: 'Hengyi Cai, Hongshen Chen, Cheng Zhang, Yonghao Song, Xiaofang Zhao and Dawei Yin. Adaptive Parameterization for Neural Dialogue Generation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2019), Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019.'
---

**Abstract**: Neural conversation systems generate responses based on the sequence-to-sequence (SEQ2SEQ) paradigm. Typically, the model is equipped with a single set of learned parameters to generate responses for given input contexts. When confronting diverse conversations, its adaptability is rather limited and the model is hence prone to generate generic responses. In this work, we propose an Adaptive Neural Dialogue generation model, AdaND, which manages various conversations with conversation-specific parameterization. For each conversation, the model generates parameters of the encoder-decoder by referring to the input context. In particular, we propose two adaptive parameterization mechanisms: a context-aware and a topic-aware parameterization mechanism. The context-aware parameterization directly generates the parameters by capturing local semantics of the given context. The topic-aware parameterization enables parameter sharing among conversations with similar topics by first inferring the latent topics of the given context and then generating the parameters with respect to the distributional topics. Extensive experiments conducted on a large-scale real-world conversational dataset show that our model achieves superior performance in terms of both quantitative metrics and human evaluations.

<!-- **Motivation**:
-   Neural dialogue generation model is prone to generate generic responses when conversations are extremely diverse.
-   A single model with diverse parameters manage diverse conversations.
-   A context-sensitive local parameterization and a topic-aware global parameterization mechanism are introduced. -->

<!-- [Download paper here](https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D19-1188/) -->

Recommended citation: Hengyi Cai, Hongshen Chen, Cheng Zhang, Yonghao Song, Xiaofang Zhao and Dawei Yin. Adaptive Parameterization for Neural Dialogue Generation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2019), Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019.